1. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 1;285(40):30731-40. Epub 2010 Jul 22.

TNFα-exposed bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells promote locomotion of
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells through transcriptional activation of CXCR3 ligand
chemokines.

Shin SY, Nam JS, Lim Y, Lee YH.

Institute of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University Hospital, Seoul
143-729, Korea.

Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BM-MSCs) are often recruited to solid
tumors, integrate into the tumor stroma, and contribute to tumor development.
TNFα is a major inflammatory cytokine present in the tumor microenvironment and
has a profound influence on the progression of tumor development. This study was 
aimed to investigate the role of BM-MSCs in tumor promotion in response to TNFα. 
Quantitative real-time PCR arrays show that diverse cytokines/chemokines were
induced in TNFα-treated BM-MSCs; in particular, CXCR3 ligand chemokines,
including CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11, were potently induced. A serial and
site-directed mutation analysis in the CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 promoters
revealed that NF-κB binding elements were responsible for TNFα-induced promoter
activation of CXCR3 ligand chemokines. TNFα stimulated NF-κB activity, and
ectopic expression of NF-κB enhanced TNFα-induced promoter activities of the
CXCR3 ligand chemokines. Gel shift and supershift assays showed that NF-κB was
associated with CXCR3 ligand chemokine promoters in response to TNFα treatment.
All three CXCR3 ligand chemokines enhanced the migration and invasive motility of
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells expressing CXCR3. Treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells
with CXCL10 activated small GTPase of Rho family proteins, such as RhoA and
Cdc42. CXCL9-, CXCL10-, or CXCL11-induced invasive capability of MDA-MB-231 cells
was completely abrogated in the presence of a neutralizing anti-CXCR3 antibody in
the culture medium. Moreover, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 stimulated the expression
of MMP-9, but not MMP-2, in MDA-MB-231 cells. These results suggest that BM-MSCs 
promote the locomotion of breast cancer cells through CXCR3 ligand-mediated actin
rearrangement by TNFα in the tumor microenvironment.


PMCID: PMC2945567 [Available on 2011/10/1]
PMID: 20650898 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Proteins. 2010 Aug 1;78(10):2202-12.

Structure and DNA binding characteristics of the three-Cys(2)His(2) domain of
mouse testis zinc finger protein.

Chou CC, Lou YC, Tang TK, Chen C.

Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei 114,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

The C-terminal three-Cys(2)His(2) zinc-finger domain (TZD) of mouse testis
zinc-finger protein binds to the 5'-TGTACAGTGT-3' at the Aie1 (aurora-C) promoter
with high specificity. Interestingly, the primary sequence of TZD is unique,
possessing two distinct linkers, TGEKP and GAAP, and distinct residues at
presumed DNA binding sites at each finger, especially finger 3. A K(d) value of
approximately 10(-8) M was obtained from surface plasmon resonance analysis for
the TZD-DNA complex. NMR structure of the free TZD showed that each zinc finger
forms a typical beta beta alpha fold. On binding to DNA, chemical shift
perturbations and the R(2) transverse relaxation rate in finger 3 are
significantly smaller than those in fingers 1 and 2, which indicates that the DNA
binding affinity in finger 3 is weaker. Furthermore, the shift perturbations
between TZD in complex with the cognate DNA and its serial mutants revealed that 
both ADE7 and CYT8, underlined in 5'-ATATGTACAGTGTTAT-3', are critical in
specific binding, and the DNA binding in finger 3 is sequence independent.
Remarkably, the shift perturbations in finger 3 on the linker mutation of TZD
(GAAP mutated to TGEKP) were barely detected, which further indicates that finger
3 does not play a critical role in DNA sequence-specific recognition. The complex
model showed that residues important for DNA binding are mainly located on
positions -1, 2, 3, and 6 of alpha-helices in fingers 1 and 2. The DNA sequence
and nonsequence-specific bindings occurring simultaneously in TZD provide
valuable information for better understanding of protein-DNA recognition.


PMID: 20544958 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 May;8(5):762-74. Epub 2010 May 11.

p120-catenin is transcriptionally downregulated by FOXC2 in non-small cell lung
cancer cells.

Mortazavi F, An J, Dubinett S, Rettig M.

Division of Hematology/Oncology, Veterans Administration, Greater Los Angeles,
West Los Angeles, California, USA. fredmortazavi@ucla.edu

p120-catenin (p120ctn) plays a major role in cell adhesion and motility through
the regulation of E-cadherin and interaction with RhoGTPase and Rac1. p120ctn is 
downregulated in several malignancies including non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). Here, we investigated transcriptional regulation of p120ctn in NSCLC. We
cloned a 1,400-bp amplicon of chromosome 11 from position -1,082 to +320 relative
to the transcription start site into a firefly luciferase reporter vector and
prepared serial deletion constructs to pinpoint cis-acting elements involved in
the regulation of p120ctn. We transfected NSCLC cell lines and immortalized
normal human respiratory epithelial cells with the abovementioned constructs. We 
found reduced p120ctn promoter activity, protein level, and mRNA message in lung 
cancer cells compared with noncancerous immortalized lung epithelial cells.
Serial deletion analysis of p120ctn promoter identified a region between
positions +267 and +282, which mediated the transcriptional repression of
p120ctn. This region harbored putative binding sites for FOXC2 and FOXL1
transcription factors. Direct binding of FOXC2 to the p120ctn promoter between
positions +267 and +282 was confirmed by electromobility shift assay.
RNAi-mediated silencing of FOXC2 in A549, H157, and H358 cells resulted in
increasing p120ctn promoter activity as well as mRNA and protein levels. Finally,
silencing FOXC2 in these NSCLC cells enhanced E-cadherin level, which was
reversed by simultaneous silencing of p120ctn. In summary, our data support the
notion that FOXC2 mediates the transcriptional repression of p120ctn in NSCLC.


PMID: 20460685 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biol Reprod. 2010 Aug 1;83(2):296-306. Epub 2010 Apr 28.

Regulation of a bovine nonclassical major histocompatibility complex class I gene
promoter.

O'Gorman GM, Naib AA, Ellis SA, Mamo S, O'Doherty AM, Lonergan P, Fair T.

School of Agriculture, Food Science & Veterinary Medicine, University College
Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.

Studies have shown in humans and other species that the major histocompatibility 
complex class I (MHC-I) region is involved at a number of levels in the
establishment and maintenance of pregnancy. The aim of this study was to
characterize how a bovine nonclassical MHC-I gene (NC1) is regulated. Initial
serial deletion experiments of a 2-kb fragment of the NC1 promoter identified
regions with positive regulatory elements in the proximal promoter and evidence
for a silencer module(s) further upstream that cooperatively contributed to
constitutive NC1 expression. The cytokines interferon tau (IFNT), interferon
gamma (IFNG), and interleukin 4 (IL4) significantly increased luciferase
expression in NC1 promoter reporter constructs and endogenous NC1 mRNA levels in 
a bovine endometrial cell line. In addition, IFNG, IL3, IL4, and progesterone
significantly increased Day 7 bovine blastocyst NC1 mRNA expression when
supplemented during in vitro embryo culture. Site-directed mutagenesis analysis
identified a STAT6 binding site that conferred IL4 responsiveness in the NC1
proximal promoter. Furthermore, methylation treatment of the proximal promoter,
which contains a CpG island, completely abrogated constitutive NC1 expression.
Overall, the findings presented here suggest that constitutive NC1 expression is 
regulated positively by elements in the proximal promoter, which are further
controlled by upstream silencer modules. The promoter is responsive to IFNT,
IFNG, and IL4, suggesting possible roles for these cytokines in bovine
preimplantation embryo survival and/or maternal-fetal tolerance. Our studies also
suggest that methylation of the proximal promoter, in particular, could play a
significant role in regulating NC1 expression.


PMID: 20427761 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Feb 1;316(3):466-76. Epub 2009 Sep 26.

Stanniocalcin-2 is a HIF-1 target gene that promotes cell proliferation in
hypoxia.

Law AY, Wong CK.

Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong.

Stanniocalcin-2 (STC2), the paralog of STC1, has been suggested as a novel target
of oxidative stress response to protect cells from apoptosis. The expression of
STC2 has been reported to be highly correlated with human cancer development. In 
this study, we reported that STC2 is a HIF-1 target gene and is involved in the
regulation of cell proliferation. STC2 was shown to be up-regulated in different 
breast and ovarian cancer cells, following exposure to hypoxia. Using ovarian
cancer cells (SKOV3), the underlying mechanism of HIF-1 mediated STC2 gene
transactivation was characterized. Hypoxia-induced STC2 expression was found to
be HIF-1alpha dependent and required the recruitment of p300 and HDAC7. Using
STC2 promoter deletion constructs and site-directed mutagenesis, two authentic
consensus HIF-1 binding sites were identified. Under hypoxic condition, the
silencing of STC2 reduced while the overexpression of STC2 increased the levels
of phosphorylated retinoblastoma and cyclin D in both SKOV3 and MCF7 cells. The
change in cell cycle proteins correlated with the data of the serial cell counts.
The results indicated that cell proliferation was reduced in STC2-silenced cells 
but was increased in STC2-overexpressing hypoxic cells. Solid tumor progression
is usually associated with hypoxia. The identification and functional analysis of
STC2 up-regulation by hypoxia, a feature of the tumor microenvironment, sheds
light on a possible role for STC2 in tumors.


PMID: 19786016 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;567:113-32.

Serial analysis of binding elements for transcription factors.

Chen J.

Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi
State, MS, USA.

The ability to determine genome-wide location of transcription factor binding
sites (TFBS) is crucial for elucidating gene regulatory networks in human cells
during normal development and disease such as tumorigenesis. To achieve this
goal, we developed a method called serial analysis of binding elements for
transcription factors (SABE) for globally identifying TFBS in human or other
mammalian genomes. In this method, a specific antibody targeting a DNA-binding
transcription factor of interest is used to pull down the transcription factor
and its bound DNA elements through chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). ChIP DNA
fragments are further enriched by subtractive hybridization against non-enriched 
DNA and analyzed through generation of sequence tags similar to serial analysis
of gene expression (SAGE). The SABE method circumvents the need for microarrays
and is able to identify immunoprecipitated loci in an unbiased manner. The
combination of ChIP, subtractive hybridization, and SAGE-type methods is
advantageous over other similar strategies to reduce the level of intrinsic noise
sequences that is typically present in ChIP samples from human or other mammalian
cells.


PMID: 19588089 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 24;284(30):19856-66. Epub 2009 Jun 2.

A novel POK family transcription factor, ZBTB5, represses transcription of
p21CIP1 gene.

Koh DI, Choi WI, Jeon BN, Lee CE, Yun CO, Hur MW.

Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brain Korea 21 Project for
Medical Science, Institute of Genetic Science, Yonsei University School of
Medicine, SeoDaeMoon-Ku, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Transcriptional repression through chromatin remodeling and histone deacetylation
has been postulated as a driving force for tumorigenesis. We isolated and
characterized a novel POZ domain Krüppel-like zinc finger transcription
repressor, ZBTB5 (zinc finger and BTB domain-containing 5). Serial analysis of
gene expression (SAGE) analysis showed that ZBTB5 expression is higher in
retinoblastoma and muscle cancer tissues. Immunocytochemistry showed that ZBTB5
was localized to the nucleus, particularly nuclear speckles. ZBTB5 directly
repressed transcription of cell cycle arrest gene p21 by binding to the proximal 
GC-box 5/6 elements and the two distal p53-responsive elements (bp -2323
approximately -2299; bp -1416 approximately -1392). Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays showed that ZBTB5 and p53 competed with each other in occupying the p53
binding elements. ZBTB5 interacted with co-repressor-histone deacetylase
complexes such as BCoR (BCL-6-interacting corepressor), NCoR (nuclear receptor
corepressor), and SMRT (silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid receptors)
via its POZ domain. These interactions resulted in deacetylation of histones
Ac-H3 and Ac-H4 at the proximal promoter, which is important in the
transcriptional repression of p21. MTT (3-(4,5-di meth yl thi
azol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assays and fluorescent-activated cell
sorter analysis revealed that ZBTB5 stimulated both cell proliferation and cell
cycle progression, significantly increasing the number of cells in S-phase.
Overall, our data suggest that ZBTB5 is a potent transcription repressor of cell 
cycle arrest gene p21 and a potential proto-oncogene stimulating cell
proliferation.


PMCID: PMC2740411
PMID: 19491398 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009 Jan;296(1):C13-24. Epub 2008 Oct 22.

Cell confluency-induced Stat3 activation regulates NHE3 expression by recruiting 
Sp1 and Sp3 to the proximal NHE3 promoter region during epithelial dome
formation.

Su HW, Wang SW, Ghishan FK, Kiela PR, Tang MJ.

Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, 1 Univ. Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan.

Activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (Stat3) during
cell confluency is related to its regulatory roles in cell growth arrest- or
survival-related physiological or developmental processes. We previously
demonstrated that this signaling event triggers epithelial dome formation by
transcriptional augmentation of sodium hydrogen exchanger-3 (NHE3) expression.
However, the detailed molecular mechanism remained unclear. By using serial
deletions, site-directed mutagenesis, and EMSA analysis, we now demonstrate Stat3
binding to an atypical Stat3-response element in the rat proximal NHE3 promoter, 
located adjacent to a cluster of Sp cis-elements (SpA/B/C), within -77/-36 nt of 
the gene. SpB (-58/-55 nt) site was more effective than SpA (-72/-69 nt) site for
cooperative binding of Sp1/Sp3. Increasing cell density had no effect on Sp1/Sp3 
expression but resulted in their increased binding to the SpA/B/C probe along
with Stat3 and concurrently with enhanced nuclear pTyr705-Stat3 level.
Immunoprecipitation performed with the nuclear extracts demonstrated physical
interaction of Stat3 and Sp1/Sp3 triggered by cell confluency. Stat3 inhibition
by overexpression of dominant-negative Stat3-D mutant in MDCK cells or by small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown in Caco-2 cells resulted in inhibition of the 
cell density-induced NHE3 expression, Sp1/Sp3 binding, and NHE3 promoter activity
and in decreased dome formation. Thus, during confluency, ligand-independent
Stat3 activation leads to its interaction with Sp1/Sp3, their recruitment to the 
SpA/B/C cluster in a Stat3 DNA-binding domain-dependent fashion, increased
transcription, and expression of NHE3, to coordinate cell density-mediated
epithelial dome formation.


PMCID: PMC2637000
PMID: 19064501 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008 Dec 15;45(12):1642-52. Epub 2008 Sep 23.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha activates transcription of the NADPH oxidase
organizer 1 (NOXO1) gene and upregulates superoxide production in colon
epithelial cells.

Kuwano Y, Tominaga K, Kawahara T, Sasaki H, Takeo K, Nishida K, Masuda K, Kawai
T, Teshima-Kondo S, Rokutan K.

Department of Stress Science, Institute of Health Biosciences, University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

NADPH oxidase 1 (Nox1) is a multicomponent enzyme consisting of p22(phox), Nox
organizer 1 (NOXO1), Nox1 activator 1, and Rac1. Interleukin-1beta, flagellin,
interferon-gamma, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) similarly induced
Nox1 in a colon cancer cell line (T84), whereas only TNF-alpha fully induced
NOXO1 and upregulated superoxide-producing activity by ninefold. This
upregulation was canceled by knockdown of NOXO1 with small interfering RNAs.
TNF-alpha rapidly phosphorylated p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase 1/2, followed by phosphorylation of c-Jun and c-Fos and
appearance of an AP-1 binding activity within 30 min. We cloned the 5' flank of
the human NOXO1 gene (-3888 to +263 bp), and found that the region between -585
and -452 bp, which contains consensus elements of YY-1, AP-1, and Ets, and the
GC-rich region encoding three putative binding sites for SP-1, was crucial for
TNF-alpha-dependent promoter activity. Serial mutation analysis of the elements
identified an AP-1 binding site (from -561 to -551 bp, agtAAGtcatg) as a crucial 
element for TNF-alpha-stimulated transcription of the human NOXO1 gene, which was
also confirmed by the AP-1 decoy experiments. Thus, TNF-alpha acts as a potent
activator of Nox1-based oxidase in colon epithelial cells, suggesting a potential
role of this oxidase in inflammation of the colon.


PMID: 18929641 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(24):7368-79. Epub 2008 Oct 13.

A genome-wide screen for beta-catenin binding sites identifies a downstream
enhancer element that controls c-Myc gene expression.

Yochum GS, Cleland R, Goodman RH.

Vollum Institute and Department of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd., Portland, OR 97239, USA.
yochumg@ohsu.edu

Mutations in components of the Wnt signaling pathway initiate colorectal
carcinogenesis by deregulating the beta-catenin transcriptional coactivator.
beta-Catenin activation of one target in particular, the c-Myc proto-oncogene, is
required for colon cancer pathogenesis. beta-Catenin is known to regulate c-Myc
expression via sequences upstream of the transcription start site. Here, we
report that a more robust beta-catenin binding region localizes 1.4 kb downstream
from the c-Myc transcriptional stop site. This site was discovered using a
genome-wide method for identifying transcription factor binding sites termed
serial analysis of chromatin occupancy. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-scanning
assays demonstrate that the 5' enhancer and the 3' binding element are the only
beta-catenin and TCF4 binding regions across the c-Myc locus. When placed
downstream of a simian virus 40-driven promoter-luciferase construct, the 3'
element activated luciferase transcription when introduced into HCT116 cells.
c-Myc transcription is negligible in quiescent HCT116 cells but is induced when
cells reenter the cell cycle after the addition of mitogens. Using these cells,
we found that beta-catenin and TCF4 occupancy at the 3' enhancer precede
occupancy at the 5' enhancer. Association of c-Jun, beta-catenin, and TCF4
specifically with the downstream enhancer underlies mitogen stimulation of c-Myc 
transcription. Our findings indicate that a downstream enhancer element provides 
the principal regulation of c-Myc expression.


PMCID: PMC2593444
PMID: 18852287 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Jun;7(6):1365-75. Epub 2008 Jun 4.

Modulation of the expression of the invasion-suppressor CRMP-1 by
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition via reciprocal regulation of Sp1 and C/EBPalpha.

Wu CC, Lin JC, Yang SC, Lin CW, Chen JJ, Shih JY, Hong TM, Yang PC.

Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Collapsin response mediator protein-1 (CRMP-1) controls neural development and
axonal growth but also acts as a cancer invasion suppressor. In this study, we
investigated the transcriptional regulation of CRMP-1 expression. Using a serial 
deletion strategy, we identified a basal promoter region between nucleotides -100
and -180 in the 5' flanking region of CRMP-1 (nucleotides -1,920 to +50) that
contains multiple putative Sp1 and C/EBPalpha sites. Site-directed mutagenesis
and deletion analysis revealed that the two C/EBPalpha sites, from nucleotides
-122 to -133 and from nucleotides -101 to -113, are the most important regulatory
elements. Gel-shift and antibody supershift assays showed that Sp1 protein was
also present at this C/EBPalpha site, which overlaps with a Sp1 site.
Overexpression of Sp1 decreased CRMP-1 promoter activity and protein expression, 
whereas overexpression of C/EBPalpha produced the opposite effect. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that Sp1 and C/EBPalpha compete for binding 
at the overlapping C/EBPalpha and Sp1 sites and reciprocally regulate CRMP-1
expression. Overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) decreased CRMP-1 mRNA and 
protein expression. Conversely, the COX-2 inhibitor, celecoxib, induced a
dose-dependent increase in CRMP-1 expression. COX-2 inhibition also decreased
Sp1-DNA complex formation and inhibited cell invasion. We conclude that
transcription of the invasion suppressor, CRMP-1, is reciprocally regulated at
the promoter region by C/EBPalpha and Sp1. COX-2 inhibitors increase CRMP-1
expression by inhibiting Sp1-DNA complex formation and enhancing DNA binding of
C/EBPalpha at the promoter.


PMID: 18524846 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 2;282(44):32084-92. Epub 2007 Aug 30.

Characterization of pancreatic transcription factor Pdx-1 binding sites using
promoter microarray and serial analysis of chromatin occupancy.

Keller DM, McWeeney S, Arsenlis A, Drouin J, Wright CV, Wang H, Wollheim CB,
White P, Kaestner KH, Goodman RH.

Vollum Institute, and Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health and 
Preventative Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon
97239, USA. kellerd@ohsu.edu

The homeobox transcription factor Pdx-1 is necessary for pancreas organogenesis
and beta cell function, however, most Pdx-1-regulated genes are unknown. To
further the understanding of Pdx-1 in beta cell biology, we have characterized
its genomic targets in NIT-1 cells, a mouse insulinoma cell line. To identify
novel targets, we developed a microarray that includes traditional promoters as
well as non-coding conserved elements, micro-RNAs, and elements identified
through an unbiased approach termed serial analysis of chromatin occupancy. In
total, 583 new Pdx-1 target genes were identified, many of which contribute to
energy sensing and insulin release in pancreatic beta cells. By analyzing 31 of
the protein-coding Pdx-1 target genes, we show that 29 are expressed in beta
cells and, of these, 68% are down- or up-regulated in cells expressing a dominant
negative mutant of Pdx-1. We additionally show that many Pdx-1 targets also
interact with NeuroD1/BETA2, including the micro-RNA miR-375, a known regulator
of insulin secretion.


PMID: 17761679 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genes Dev. 2007 Jul 1;21(13):1653-74.

The molecular signature and cis-regulatory architecture of a C. elegans gustatory
neuron.

Etchberger JF, Lorch A, Sleumer MC, Zapf R, Jones SJ, Marra MA, Holt RA, Moerman 
DG, Hobert O.

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Taste receptor cells constitute a highly specialized cell type that perceives and
conveys specific sensory information to the brain. The detailed molecular
composition of these cells and the mechanisms that program their fate are, in
general, poorly understood. We have generated serial analysis of gene expression 
(SAGE) libraries from two distinct populations of single, isolated sensory neuron
classes, the gustatory neuron class ASE and the thermosensory neuron class AFD,
from the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. By comparing these two libraries, we
have identified >1000 genes that define the ASE gustatory neuron class on a
molecular level. This set of genes contains determinants of the differentiated
state of the ASE neuron, such as a surprisingly complex repertoire of
transcription factors (TFs), ion channels, neurotransmitters, and receptors, as
well as seven-transmembrane receptor (7TMR)-type putative gustatory receptor
genes. Through the in vivo dissection of the cis-regulatory regions of several
ASE-expressed genes, we identified a small cis-regulatory motif, the "ASE motif,"
that is required for the expression of many ASE-expressed genes. We demonstrate
that the ASE motif is a binding site for the C2H2 zinc finger TF CHE-1, which is 
essential for the correct differentiation of the ASE gustatory neuron. Taken
together, our results provide a unique view of the molecular landscape of a
single neuron type and reveal an important aspect of the regulatory logic for
gustatory neuron specification in C. elegans.


PMCID: PMC1899474
PMID: 17606643 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. BMC Genomics. 2007 Apr 11;8:99.

Comparative genomics and experimental promoter analysis reveal functional
liver-specific elements in mammalian hepatic lipase genes.

van Deursen D, Botma GJ, Jansen H, Verhoeven AJ.

Department of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research School COEUR, Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. d.vandeursen@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Mammalian hepatic lipase (HL) genes are transcribed almost
exclusively in hepatocytes. The basis for this liver-restricted expression is not
completely understood. We hypothesized that the responsible cis-acting elements
are conserved among mammalian HL genes. To identify these elements, we made a
genomic comparison of 30 kb of 5'-flanking region of the rat, mouse, rhesus
monkey, and human HL genes. The in silico data were verified by promoter-reporter
assays in transfected hepatoma HepG2 and non-hepatoma HeLa cells using serial
5'-deletions of the rat HL (-2287/+9) and human HL (-685/+13) promoter region.
RESULTS: Highly conserved elements were present at the proximal promoter region, 
and at 14 and 22 kb upstream of the transcriptional start site. Both of these
upstream elements increased transcriptional activity of the human HL (-685/+13)
promoter region 2-3 fold. Within the proximal HL promoter region, conserved
clusters of transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) were identified at
-240/-200 (module A), -80/-40 (module B), and -25/+5 (module C) by the rVista
software. In HepG2 cells, modules B and C, but not module A, were important for
basal transcription. Module B contains putative binding sites for hepatocyte
nuclear factors HNF1alpha. In the presence of module B, transcription from the
minimal HL promoter was increased 1.5-2 fold in HepG2 cells, but inhibited 2-4
fold in HeLa cells. CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that searching for conserved
non-coding sequences by comparative genomics is a valuable tool in identifying
candidate enhancer elements. With this approach, we found two putative enhancer
elements in the far upstream region of the HL gene. In addition, we obtained
evidence that the -80/-40 region of the HL gene is responsible for enhanced HL
promoter activity in hepatoma cells, and for silencing HL promoter activity in
non-liver cells.


PMCID: PMC1853088
PMID: 17428321 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Nat Protoc. 2006;1(3):1481-93.

Serial analysis of binding elements for human transcription factors.

Chen J.

Department of Pediatrics, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, Texas 78229, USA. chenj5@uthscsa.edu

Serial analysis of binding elements (SABE) is a method that can be used to
identify the genome-wide location of transcription factor binding sites in human 
or other mammalian cells. In this method, a specific antibody targeting a
DNA-binding transcription factor of interest is used to pull down the
transcription factor and its bound DNA elements through chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). ChIP DNA fragments are further enriched by
subtractive hybridization against non-enriched DNA using representational
difference analysis (RDA) and analyzed through the generation of sequence tags
similar to serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE). The SABE method circumvents
the need for microarrays and is able to identify immunoprecipitated loci in an
unbiased manner. The combination of ChIP, RDA and SAGE-type methods has
advantages over other similar strategies in reducing the level of intrinsic noise
sequences that are typically present in ChIP samples from human cells. This
protocol takes about 2 weeks to complete.


PMID: 17406439 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Biol Rep. 2007 Jun;34(2):69-77. Epub 2007 Mar 30.

Identification and analysis of the promoter region of the human PLC-delta4 gene.

Chae SW, Kim JM, Yun YP, Lee WK, Kim JS, Kim YH, Lee KS, Ko YJ, Lee KH, Rha HK.

Neuroscience Genome Research Center, The Catholic University of Korea,
Banpo-dong, Socho-ku, Seoul 137-701, Korea.

The delta4 isoform of phospholipase C (PLC-delta4) is thought to be associated
with various cellular functions and disease status. However, little is known
about how its function is controlled in cells, particularly in terms of the
regulation of its expression. To understand the regulation mechanisms of the
PLC-delta4 gene transcription, the 5'-flanking region (-2046 approximately +5)
(the nucleotide sequence data reported in this paper have been submitted to the
EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ data bank under accession numbers DQ302751) of the human
PLC-delta4 gene was isolated from human genomic DNA. It was a TATA-less promoter 
with very GC-rich sequences near the transcription start site. The activity of
the PLC-delta4 promoter was shown in various human and mouse cell lines by
luciferase reporter assay. Serial deletion analysis identified the core promoter 
region as being between -402 and -67, in which an E-box and an AP-1 binding site 
played important roles in the promoter activity. In addition, we also showed that
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-1,3-acetate (TPA), a PKC activator and tumor promoter, 
induced the activity of the PLC-delta4 promoter via the AP-1 binding site. In
summary, this study identified a core promoter region of the hPLC-delta4 gene and
the factor binding sites responsible for the promoter activity. These results
will provide important new information to further understand the regulatory
mechanism of the PLC-delta4 function.


PMID: 17394098 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Mar;1769(3):204-8. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Promoter analysis of human CC chemokine CCL23 gene in U937 monocytoid cells.

Shin YH, Lee GW, Son KN, Lee SM, Kang CJ, Kwon BS, Kim J.

Graduate School of Biotechnology and Institute of Life Sciences and Resources,
Kyung Hee University, Yongin 449-701, Korea.

Expression of CCL23 is induced by external stimuli including PMA in monocytes,
but its transcriptional regulation has not been studied to date. Serial deletion 
analysis of its 5' flanking region revealed that the region -293 to +31 was
important for induction by PMA. Cis-acting elements at the -269/-264 (NFAT site),
-167/-159 (NF-kappaB site), and -51/-43 (AP-1 site) positions were identified as 
the critical sites for the CCL23 expression in U937 cells. We demonstrated the
binding of the transcription factors to the consensus sites. Specific inhibitors 
for signal pathways reduced PMA-induced expression of CCL23, confirming
involvement of these transcription factors.


PMID: 17368823 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 May;127(5):1187-96. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

IFN-gamma upregulates expression of the mouse complement C1rA gene in
keratinocytes via IFN-regulatory factor-1.

Byun SJ, Jeon IS, Lee H, Kim TY.

National Livestock Research Institute, Division of Animal Biotechnology, Suwon,
South Korea.

We examined the expression of the mouse complement component C1rA (mC1rA) in
IFN-gamma-stimulated mouse keratinocytes (Pam 212) and found that it was
upregulated. To analyze the mechanism involved, we cloned the 2,150 bp
5'-flanking region of mC1rA by the vectorette-PCR technique, and identified the
transcription start site of mC1rA by rapid amplification of complementary DNA
ends. Analysis of the 5' sequence revealed putative binding sites for activator
protein 1, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), signal transducer and
activator of transcription 1 (STAT-1), IFN-regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), and
others. We detected transcriptional activation dependent on this upstream region 
in reporter gene assays and Northern blots. To identify the cis-acting regulatory
elements involved, we analyzed serial deletion constructs of the promoter using
luciferase reporters. The -80 to -19 bp region, which contains a putative IRF-1
binding site, was required for both basal promoter activity and responses to
IFN-gamma. The use of site-directed point mutations, electrophoresis mobility
shift assays, and supershift assays indicated that the putative IRF-1 binding
site was essential for both IFN-gamma-dependent and -independent transcriptional 
activity of the mC1rA promoter. We conclude that IFN-gamma stimulates mC1rA gene 
expression via IRF-1 in mouse keratinocytes.


PMID: 17159910 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):871-8. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

An antisense transcript induced by Wnt/beta-catenin signaling decreases E2F4.

Yochum GS, Cleland R, McWeeney S, Goodman RH.

Vollum Institute, Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health and
Preventative Medicine, OHSU Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland 97239, USA. yochumg@ohsu.edu

Wnt signaling induces the nuclear accumulation of beta-catenin and transcription 
of specific target genes via the DNA-binding proteins TCF/Lef. Although all known
beta-catenin target genes encode proteins, genome-wide RNA profiling studies
indicate that many transcripts do not have this capability. Transcription
factor-binding sites associated with these noncoding transcripts can be
identified using unbiased techniques such as serial analysis of chromatin
occupancy (SACO). We used this method to identify a beta-catenin-regulated
antisense RNA expressed in HCT116 colorectal carcinoma cells, a cellular model of
activated beta-catenin signaling. Genomic signature tags designating putative
beta-catenin-binding sites mapped to the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the
E2F4 gene. We showed that both beta-catenin and TCF4 bind to the E2F4 3'-UTR site
in vivo, inducing expression of an E2F4 antisense transcript. LiCl, which mimics 
Wnt signaling, also induced expression of the E2F4 antisense transcript and
decreased E2F4 protein levels. This effect was blocked by a cDNA expressing the
E2F4 3'-UTR sense strand. The antisense-mediated decrease in E2F4 protein was
reflected by reduced E2F4 association with specific target genes, including
CCNA2, CDC2, PCNA, and Rad54. We propose that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling may
contribute to colorectal carcinogenesis by reducing the level of the E2F4 cell
cycle repressor via an antisense mechanism.


PMID: 17121828 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8(6):R64.

GATA3 protein as a MUC1 transcriptional regulator in breast cancer cells.

Abba MC, Nunez MI, Colussi AG, Croce MV, Segal-Eiras A, Aldaz CM.

Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Science Park--Research Division, Smithville, TX 78957, USA. mabba777@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Recent studies have demonstrated that members of the GATA-binding
protein (GATA) family (GATA4 and GATA5) might have pivotal roles in the
transcriptional upregulation of mucin genes (MUC2, MUC3 and MUC4) in
gastrointestinal epithelium. The zinc-finger GATA3 transcription factor has been 
reported to be involved in the growth control and differentiation of breast
epithelial cells. In SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression) studies we
observed an intriguing significant correlation between GATA3 and MUC1 mRNA
expression in breast carcinomas. We therefore designed the present study to
elucidate whether MUC1 expression is regulated by GATA3 in breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Promoter sequence analysis of the MUC1 gene identified six GATA cis
consensus elements in the 5' flanking region (GATA1, GATA3 and four GATA-like
sequences). Chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays were employed to study the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site.
GATA3 and MUC1 expression was analyzed in vitro with a GATA3 knockdown assay.
Furthermore, expression of GATA3 and MUC1 genes was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR 
and immunohistochemistry on breast cancer-specific tissue microarrays. RESULTS:
We confirmed the presence of a functional GATA3-binding site on the MUC1 promoter
region in the MCF7 cell line. We determined that GATA3 knockdown assays led to a 
decrease in MUC1 protein expression in MCF7 and T47D cells. In addition, we
detected a statistically significant correlation in expression between GATA3 and 
MUC1 genes at the mRNA and protein levels both in normal breast epithelium and in
breast carcinomas (p = 0.01). GATA3 expression was also highly associated with
estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor status (p = 0.0001) and tumor grade
(p = 0.004) in breast carcinomas. CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence
indicating that GATA3 is probably a mediator for the transcriptional upregulation
of MUC1 expression in some breast cancers.


PMCID: PMC1797033
PMID: 17078870 [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

